\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@include version.texi

@settitle User's Guide to the SOLID Collision Detection Library
@setfilename solid3.info

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* SOLID: (solid3).      Software Library for Interference Detection.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
This file documents the features and implementation of SOLID.
@end ifinfo

Copyright (c) 2001-2003  DTECTA

@iftex
@finalout
@c @smallbook
@c @cropmarks
@end iftex

@setchapternewpage odd

@titlepage
@title User's Guide
@title to the SOLID Collision Detection Library
@sp 3
@subtitle last updated @value{UPDATED}
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}
@author Gino van den Bergen
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

SOLID 3 uses Qhull from The Geometry Center of the University of Minnesota.
Qhull is copyrighted as noted below.  Qhull is free software and may be
obtained via anonymous ftp from geom.umn.edu.   
@example
        
                    Qhull, Copyright (c) 1993-2002

       The National Science and Technology Research Center for
        Computation and Visualization of Geometric Structures
                        (The Geometry Center)
                       University of Minnesota
                            400 Lind Hall
                        207 Church Street S.E.
                      Minneapolis, MN 55455  USA

                       email: qhull@@geom.umn.edu



@end example

OpenGL (R) is a trademark of Silicon Graphics, Inc.

Visual C++ (R) is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation.

@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, License, , (DIR)

This manual documents how to install and use SOLID.

@end ifinfo
@menu
* License::         Says how you can copy and share SOLID.
* Introduction::    What is it?                     
* Installation::    How to configure, compile and install SOLID.
* Usage::           How the API is set up.
* Projects::	    Things still left to do.
* Bugs::            Where to send bugs reports and questions.
@end menu

@node License, Introduction, Top, Top
@chapter License

This open-source edition of SOLID version 3 is released under the terms 
of either the GNU General Public License (GPL) or the Q Public License (QPL).
This means that for software created with SOLID version 3 you
must comply with the terms of either one of these licenses. 
@iftex
See appendices for a complete list of terms and conditions of these licenses
@end iftex
 
@menu
* GPL::    The GNU General Public License
* QPL::    The Q Public License                     
@end menu

For enquiries about commercial use of SOLID, please contact info@@dtecta.com.   

@node Introduction, Installation, License, Top
@chapter Introduction

SOLID is a software library containing functions for performing
intersection tests and proximity queries that are useful in the context
of collision detection. Collision detection is the process of detecting
pairs of geometric objects that are intersecting or are within a given
proximity of each other. In particular, SOLID is useful for detecting
collisions between objects that are moving relatively of each other over
time. The motions of objects are controlled by the client application,
and are not determined or affected by SOLID. 

Furthermore, SOLID provides functionality for determining geometric data
pertaining to a pair of objects that is used by the client application
for computing the appropriate response to a collision. This data,
referred to as response data, is passed to the client application by
means of a callback mechanism or by direct queries from the client
application. 

@section Overview

SOLID's functionality is subdivided into the following categories:

@enumerate

@item Shape definition
@item Object placement and motion 
@item Scene management
@item Response definition
@item Global actions
@item Broad phase

@end enumerate

@subsection Shape Definition

The shape of a geometric object is defined relative to its local
coordinate system. A shape can be a simple geometric primitive, e.g., a
sphere or a line segment, or a complex shape composed of multiple
primitives. Shapes defined in terms of vertex positions, e.g., a
triangle mesh, may use vertex data that is stored in memory maintained
by the client application. 

@subsection Object Placement and Motion

A geometric object is defined by a shape, an affine transformation, and
a margin. The shape is placed in the world coordinate system by
specifying the object's local coordinate system represented by an affine
transformation. 
The actual object is the set of points in world coordinates whose distance to
the shape  is at most the margin. Motion of an object can be defined by 
changing the placement of the local coordinate system, the margin, or the
positions of the vertices of the shape.  


@subsection Scene Management

Collections of objects on which collision detection has to be performed
are placed in a scene. SOLID is capable of maintaining multiple
scenes. Objects can be shared by multiple scenes. A scene maintains
cached data pertaining to the objects in the scene in order to speed-up
consecutive collision queries that are performed on the scene. 

@subsection Response Definition

In SOLID, collision response is handled by callback functions.
The types of response and the callback functions that needs to be executed
for each pair of intersecting objects is stored in a response
table. Currently, there are three types of response: 
@enumerate
 
@item Simple response: no response data is returned.
@item Witnessed response: a common point of the intersecting objects is
returned. 
@item Depth response: the penetration depth of the intersecting objects
is returned. The penetration depth is the shortest vector over which one
of the objects needs to be translated in order to bring the objects into
touching contact. 
  
@end enumerate
Response tables can be shared by multiple scenes, and per scene multiple
response tables can be used. To each object that is considered for
collision detection in a response table, a response class is
assigned. Responses can be defined per pair of response classes, on all
pairs containing a specific response class, or as a default for all
pairs of response classes. 
On a pair of response classes multiple responses can be defined. 
During the lifetime of an object, it is possible to
reassign the response class associated with the object per response
table. 

  
@subsection Global Actions

The main functionality of SOLID is to perform collision tests. Given a
scene and a response table, a collision test computes for all pairs of
colliding objects on which a response is defined the required response data and
passes these data together with the colliding pair to the callback. The
response actions are defined by the client 
application in the callback and fall outside the scope of SOLID. 

The client application may also obtain response data for a given object or
pair of objects by direct queries. These direct queries are useful for static
interference checks or for tracking the closest points of a pair of objects.

@subsection Broad Phase

The broad phase detects changes in the overlap status of pairs of
axis-aligned boxes. The overlap status of a pair of boxes changes
whenever the boxes start or cease to overlap. The boxes are organized in
scenes similar to the scenes for objects. For each pair of boxes in a
scene whose overlap status is changed a callback is called. The client
defines a callback for pairs that start to overlap and one for pairs
that cease to overlap. The broad phase is actually a sub-layer of the
SOLID library, however the API can be directly accessed by the client
application.   



@section Software Package

Currently, the SOLID package consists of three separate layers: 
@enumerate

@item MT: The Mathematics Toolkit. This is a set of C++ classes containing
abstract data types for scalars, vectors, points, quaternions, matrices,
coordinate systems, and bounding boxes. Global names in this layer are
prefixed with "MT_".  

@item The broad phase: A set of C++ classes wrapped by a C API. The broad
phase detects changes in the overlap status of pairs of axis-aligned
boxes (pairs of boxes that start or cease to overlap). Global names in this
layer are prefixed with "BP_". 

@item The narrow phase: A set of C++ classes wrapped by a C API. The narrow
phase performs exact collision tests for pairs of objects, and computes
response data for the colliding pairs of objects. Global names in this layer
are prefixed with "DT_".  

@end enumerate

@section New Features of SOLID version 3

Since the previous version 2.0 of SOLID, which was released in June 1998
under the terms of the GNU Library General Public License by the
Department of Mathematics & Computing Science of Eindhoven University of
Technology, SOLID has evolved and matured considerably. New
features as well as improvements for robustness and performance have
been added. The most important changes in SOLID 3 are: 
@itemize @bullet

@item Use of single-precision floating-point numbers. The use of a
32-bit floating-point format is a requirement for games and other
interactive applications that run on current PC graphics hardware and
consoles.   

@item Penetration depth computation as a new response type. The
penetration depth of a pair of intersecting objects is the shortest
vector over which one of the objects needs to be translated in order to
bring the objects in touching contact. The penetration depth can be used
as an approximation of the contact point and contact plane, which are
necessary for physics-based simulation. The depth response replaces the
smart response in SOLID 2.0. Smart response uses the configuration of
the previous time frame for finding the contact points and plane, which
could give bad results when objects were interpenetrating over a number
of frames. 

@item SOLID 3 maintains multiple scenes. This feature is useful when
collision detection is required for multiple tasks. For instance, it is
possible to maintain at the same time a sound scene, a scene used for
visibility culling, and a scene for physics simulations, without the
objects in different scenes interfering with each other. 

@item Stridden vertex arrays can be used for defining complex shapes. 

@item Objects can be expanded spherically, i.e., a margin that defines
the radius of the sphere that is 'added' can be set for each object. The
object is the set of points whose distance to the shape is at most the
margin. Margins are useful for creating objects with rounded edges, or
'sensitive' areas around an object.        

@item Functions for direct computation of response data have been added
to the API. This is useful, since it allows the client to
check overlap status, distance, etc., without having to perform a global
collision test. 

@item A ray cast has been added to SOLID. The ray cast returns the
object in a scene that the ray hits first. Also, the hit spot and
surface normal to this object are returned. 

@item Response callbacks are defined in a response table independent of
a scene. 

@item Response callbacks are defined per pair of response classes rather
than per object pair. With each object for which a response is defined
in a response table, a response class is associated. The response class
of an object may change over time. 

@item It is now possible to define multiple response callbacks per
object pair.  This is useful for performing several actions for a single
collision (play sound, apply impulse, update statistics). 


@end itemize          

@node Installation, Usage, Introduction, Top
@chapter Installing the SOLID SDK

@section Requirements

The SOLID library (libsolid) and the broad-phase library (libbroad) have a
standard C API and can be linked to both C and C++ 
applications.  
Note that libsolid and libbroad are internally coded in C++ and
thus need the libstdc++ library on Unix platforms (link using g++ rather
than gcc).
The mathematics toolkit (MT) is coded in standard C++ and uses templates
extensively. The source code compiles under GNU g++ version 2.95 and higher
and Microsoft Visual C++ version 6.0 SP4 and higher.
 




@section Installation

All header files that export types and functions are stored in the
@samp{include} directory. 
Source files are stored in the @samp{src} directory.
On a Unix-like operating system, a @samp{configure} script generated by the
GNU build tools (automake, autoconf, libtool) is used for creating the
Makefiles. 
Simply type @samp{./configure} followed by @samp{make} in the root of the
SOLID distribution directory to build the SOLID lib and example programs.
Typing @samp{make install} installs the SOLID library header files and
binaries as well as this documentation in @samp{/usr/local}. 
Note that you usually must have root privileges for adding items to
@samp{/usr/local}.
See @samp{./configure --help} for installing the library in a different
location.

The SOLID library can be built under Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 and higher using
the workspace (.dsw) and project (.dsp) files found in the @samp{VisualC6} 
directory.  
For use with Visual C++ 7.0 and higher, the workspace and project files must
first be converted to the newer solution (.sln) and project (.vcproj) formats. 
On a Win32 platform, the simplest way to make the
SOLID SDK accessible in your applications is to add the SOLID
@samp{include} and @samp{lib} directories to respectively the include and link
path used by the compiler. 
For running executables built using SOLID, the @samp{solid.dll} should be
contained in the executable search path.  
This is achieved most easily by copying these DLLs either to the directory
containing the executable or to the @samp{WINxxxx/system32} directory.

SOLID uses the Qhull library for computing convex hulls of sets of points. 
In case the Qhull library is not available for your platform, SOLID can still
be built. However, in that case, queries on convex hulls built with
@code{DT_NewPolytope} (see below) fall back to brute force algorithms, 
and are therefore much slower.
In order to build a SOLID library without Qhull, make sure that the
preprocessing flag @samp{-DQHULL} is not set.

The core of SOLID may use either single or double precision floating-point
arithmetic.
The default option is single-precision.
In order to build a double-precision SOLID core, use @samp{configure} with
the @samp{--enable-doubles} option.
Under Visual C++, doubles can be enabled using the @samp{-DUSE_DOUBLES}
preprocessing flag.
Note that this flag only affects the floating-point numbers that are used
internally in SOLID. 
The API functions always use single-precision floating-point numbers.
    
In the same way, the SOLID core can be built using a tracer class for
scalars. 
See the file @samp{MT_ScalarTracer.h} in the @samp{include} directory.
A scalar tracer is used for tracing rounding errors in results of
floating-point operations. 
An object of the type @code{MT_ScalarTracer} has a value field and an error
field. The value field holds the result of an operation, and the error
field multiplied by the machine epsilon gives an estimated upper bound for the
relative rounding error. 
The @code{MT_ScalarTracer} class behaves as the primitive scalar types
@code{float} and @code{double}, however, constants of this type have to be
constructed explicitly.   
In order to build a SOLID core that uses scalar tracers, create Makefiles using
@samp{configure} with the @samp{--enable-tracer} option.
Under Visual C++, the tracers are enabled using the @samp{-DUSE_TRACER}
preprocessing flag.
This option is very useful for debugging purposes.
Makefiles for building debug binaries of SOLILD are created using the
@samp{--enable-debug} option.
  

 

@node Usage, Projects, Installation, Top
@chapter The SOLID API

The SOLID API is a set of C functions. All API functions, also referred to as
commands, use arguments that have primitive types, such as, integers, floats,
and arrays of floats, or handles (type-mangled pointers) to internal objects
of SOLID. The types @code{DT_Scalar}, @code{DT_Vector} and @code{DT_Quaternion} are simply
typedefs:
@example

typedef float     DT_Scalar; 
typedef DT_Scalar DT_Vector3[3]; 
typedef DT_Scalar DT_Quaternion[4]; 

@end example 
The MT C++ classes can be used for representing geometric data such as vectors
and quaternions as they are implicitly casted to arrays of floats, however the
use of these classes is not required for calling SOLID functions.
SOLID API functions can be called using your own or third-party 3D geometry
objects if you stick with the following rules:
@itemize @bullet

@item All used scalar types are of the type @code{float}.

@item Quaternions store their imaginary vector part before the real scalar
part. Thus, for an array @code{float q[4]} that represents a quaternion,
@code{q[3]} must be the scalar part.

@item Transformations are specified using arrays of 16 floating-point numbers
representing a 4x4 column-major matrix as used in OpenGL. This matrix representation is
discussed below.


@end itemize

@section Building Shapes

The commands for creating and destroying shapes are 
@example

DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewBox(DT_Scalar x, DT_Scalar y, DT_Scalar z);
DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewCone(DT_Scalar radius, DT_Scalar height);
DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewCylinder(DT_Scalar radius, DT_Scalar height);
DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewSphere(DT_Scalar radius);
DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewPoint(const DT_Vector3 point); 
DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewLineSegment(const DT_Vector3 source, 
                                 const DT_Vector3 target);

DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewMinkowski(DT_ShapeHandle shape1, 
                               DT_ShapeHandle shape2);
DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewHull(DT_ShapeHandle shape1, 
                          DT_ShapeHandle shape2);

void           DT_DeleteShape(DT_ShapeHandle shape);

@end example
Shapes are referred to by values of @code{DT_ShapeHandle}. 
The command @code{DT_NewBox} creates a rectangular parallelepiped centered
at the origin and aligned with the axes of the shape's local coordinate system.
The parameters specify its extent along the respective coordinate axes.
The commands @code{DT_NewCone} and @code{DT_NewCylinder} create respectively a
cone and a cylinder centered
at the origin and whose central axis is aligned with the @math{y}-axis of the
local coordinate system.
The cone's apex is at @math{y = height / 2}. 
The command @code{DT_NewSphere} creates a sphere centered at the origin of
the local coordinate system.
The command @code{DT_NewPoint} creates a single point. 
The command @code{DT_NewLineSegment} creates a single line segment in a
similar way.

Any pair of convex shapes (including general polytopes) can be combined to
form compound shapes using the commands @code{DT_NewMinkowski} and
@code{DT_NewHull}.
The command @code{DT_NewMinkowski} `adds' the two shapes by sweeping one
shape along the other. For instance, the Minkowski addition of a sphere and a
line segment creates a hot dog. 
The command @code{DT_NewHull} creates a shape that represents the exact convex
hull of the two shapes.

Complex shape types composed of simple polytopes (polytope soups) are
created using the 
@code{DT_NewComplexShape} command.
Here, a simple polytope is a @math{d}-dimensional polytopes, where
@math{d} is at most 3. 
A simple @math{d}-polytope can be a simplex (point, line segment, triangle,
tetrahedron), a convex polygon, or a convex polyhedron.

There are no topological constraints on the set of vertices of a polytope.
In particular, the vertices of a polytope need not be affinely independent,
and need not be extreme vertices of the convex hull.
However, convex polytopes with many vertices may deteriorate the performance.
Such complex polytopes should be created using the @code{DT_NewPolytope} command.
Make sure that in that case, SOLID is built using Qhull.

For constructing complex shapes the following
commands are used:  
@example
DT_VertexBaseHandle DT_NewVertexBase(const void *pointer, 
                                     DT_Size stride);
void DT_DeleteVertexBase(DT_VertexBaseHandle vertexBase);	
void DT_ChangeVertexBase(DT_VertexBaseHandle vertexBase, 
                         const void *pointer);

DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewComplexShape(DT_VertexBaseHandle vertexBase);
void           DT_EndComplexShape();

DT_ShapeHandle DT_NewPolytope(DT_VertexBaseHandle vertexBase);
void           DT_EndPolytope();

void DT_Begin();
void DT_End();

void DT_Vertex(const DT_Vector3 vertex);
void DT_VertexIndex(DT_Index index);

void DT_VertexIndices(DT_Count count, const DT_Index *indices);
void DT_VertexRange(DT_Index first, DT_Count count); 

@end example
A @math{d}-polytope is specified by enumerating its vertices. This can be done
in two ways. In the first way, the vertices are specified by value,
using the @code{DT_Vertex} command. The following example shows how the
faces of a pyramid are specified.   
@example

DT_Vector3 float verts[] = @{ 
		   @{  1.0f,  0.0f,  1.0f @},
		   @{  1.0f,  0.0f, -1.0f @},
		   @{ -1.0f,  0.0f, -1.0f @}, 
		   @{ -1.0f,  0.0f,  1.0f @},
		   @{  0.0f, 1.27f,  0.0f @}
@};

DT_ShapeHandle pyramid = DT_NewComplexShape(NULL);

DT_Begin();
DT_Vertex(verts[0]); 
DT_Vertex(verts[1]); 
DT_Vertex(verts[2]); 
DT_Vertex(verts[3]);
DT_End();

DT_Begin();
DT_Vertex(verts[0]); 
DT_Vertex(verts[1]); 
DT_Vertex(verts[4]); 
DT_End();

...

DT_EndComplexShape();

@end example
Here, an argument of @code{NULL} in @code{DT_NewComplexShape}@ denotes that the
complex shape does not use an external vertex array.

In the second method, the vertices are referred to by indices. 
For each complex shape, we specify a single array of vertices.
Vertex arrays are maintained by the client application and can be
accessed directly by SOLID. 
Vertex arrays are accessed via vertex bases.
The command @code{DT_NewVertexBase} creates a vertex base for 
the array given by the argument @code{pointer}. 
The client must maintain vertex data in single-precision floating-point
format.
The client is free to store vertex data using arbitrary spacing
in-between the individual array items.   
The spacing is specified using the @code{DT_Size stride} parameter.
For instance, the client maintains an array of vertices of the type:
@example
   
struct Vertex @{
    float xyz[3];
    float uv[2];
    float normal[3];
@};

struct Vertex verts[NUM_VERTICES];

@end example
When specifying a complex shape you can use this data as follows
@example

DT_VertexBaseHandle base = DT_NewVertexBase(verts[0].xyz, 
                                            sizeof(struct Vertex));

@end example 
A stride of zero denotes that the vertex coordinate data is packed in a
separate array, thus
@example

DT_Vector3 verts[NUM_VERTICES];

DT_VertexBaseHandle base = DT_NewVertexBase(verts[0], 0);

@end example 
Each time the vertices are updated, or a new vertex base is assigned,
to a complex shape, for instance, when using a deformable triangle mesh,
the client needs to notify SOLID of a changed vertex array by calling 
@code{DT_ChangeVertexBase}. 
We discuss the use of this command further on.

The handle to the vertex base is passed as argument to @code{DT_NewComplexShape}.
The command @code{DT_VertexIndex} is used for
specifying vertices. See the following example:
@example

DT_ShapeHandle pyramid = DT_NewComplexShape(base);

DT_Begin();
DT_VertexIndex(0); 
DT_VertexIndex(1); 
DT_VertexIndex(2); 
DT_VertexIndex(3); 
DT_End();

DT_Begin();
DT_VertexIndex(0); 
DT_VertexIndex(1); 
DT_VertexIndex(4); 
DT_End();

...

DT_EndComplexShape();

@end example
Alternatively, the indices can be placed into an array and specified
using the command @code{DT_VertexIndices}, as in the following example:
@example

DT_Index face0[4] = @{ 0, 1, 2, 3 @};
DT_Index face1[3] = @{ 0, 1, 4 @};

...

DT_VertexIndices(4, face0);
DT_VertexIndices(3, face1);

@end example
Finally, a polytope can be specified from a range of vertices using the
command @code{DT_VertexRange}.
The range is specified by the first index and the number of vertices.
In the following example a pyramid is constructed as a convex polyhedron,
which is the convex hull of the vertices in the array.
@example

DT_ShapeHandle pyramid = DT_NewComplexShape(base);
DT_VertexRange(0, 5);
DT_EndComplexShape();

@end example
The same shape can be built using the @code{DT_NewPolytope} command:
@example

DT_ShapeHandle pyramid = DT_NewPolytope(base);
DT_VertexRange(0, 5);
DT_EndPolytope();

@end example
Note that within a @code{DT_NewPolytope} construction all the vertex array
commands can be used to specify vertices.
The commands @code{DT_Begin} and @code{DT_End} are ignored for polytopes. 
Convex polytopes constructed using the @code{DT_NewPolytope} command
are preprocessed by SOLID in order to allow for faster testing, and
should be used when the number of vertices is large.  


@section Creating and Moving Objects

An object is an instance of a shape.
The commands for creating, moving and deleting objects are 
@example

DT_ObjectHandle DT_CreateObject(void *client_object, DT_ShapeHandle shape); 
void            DT_DestroyObject(DT_ObjectHandle object);

void DT_SetPosition(DT_ObjectHandle object, const DT_Vector3 position);
void DT_SetOrientation(DT_ObjectHandle object, 
                       const DT_Quaternion orientation);
void DT_SetScaling(DT_ObjectHandle object, const DT_Vector3 scaling);

void DT_SetMatrixf(DT_ObjectHandle object, const float *m); 
void DT_SetMatrixd(DT_ObjectHandle object, const double *m); 

void DT_SetMargin(DT_ObjectHandle object, DT_Scalar margin);

@end example
An object is referred to by a @code{DT_ObjectHandle}.
The first parameter @code{void *client_object} is a pointer to an
arbitrary structure in the client application.
This pointer is passed as parameter to the callback function in case of
a collision, and can be used for collision handling. 
In general, a pointer to a structure in the client application
associated with the collision object should be used.

An object's motion is specified by changing the placement of the local
coordinate system of the shape.  
Initially, the local coordinate system of an object
coincides with the world coordinate system. 

The placement of an object is changed, either by setting the position,
orientation, and scaling, or by using an OpenGL 4x4
column-major matrix representing an affine transformation. 
Placements are specified relative to the world coordinate system.
Rotations are specified using quaternions. 
The object's local coordinate system can be scaled non-uniformly by
specifying a scale factor per coordinate axis.
Following example shows how a pair
of objects are given absolute placements.  
@example

DT_ObjectHandle objectHandle = DT_CreateObject(&myObject, shapeHandle);

float position = @{ 0.0f, 1.0f, 1.0f @};
float orientation = @{ 0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 0.1f @};
float scaling = @{ 1.0f, 2.0f, 1.0f @};
 
DT_SetPosition(objectHandle, position);
DT_SetOrientation(objectHandle, orientation);
DT_SetScaling(objectHandle, scaling);

@end example
For scalings along axes that are not coordinate axes, such as shears,
you should construct a 4x4 column-major matrix representation of the
local coordinate system and use @code{DT_SetMatrix} to specify the
object placement. 

The @math{x}-axis of the local coordinate system relative
to the world coordinate system is the vector (m[0], m[1], m[2]), the
@math{y}-axis is (m[4], m[5], m[6]), the @math{z}-axis is (m[8], m[9],
m[10]), and the local origin is (m[12], m[13], m[14]).
The elements m[3], m[7], m[11], and m[15] are ignored. 
These values are assumed to be 0, 0, 0, and 1, respectively.
Thus, only affine transformations are allowed.  

By setting a positive margin using @code{DT_SetMargin} you can
spherically expand an object. The actual collision object is the set of
points whose distance to the transformed shape is at most the margin.
For instance, a hot dog or capsule can be created using
@example

DT_Vector3 source = @{ 0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f @}
DT_Vector3 target = @{ 0.0f, -1.5f, 0.0f @}

DT_ShapeHandle line = DT_NewLineSegment(source, target);

DT_ObjectHandle object = DT_CreateObject(&myHotDog, line);
DT_SetMargin(object, 0.3f);

@end example    
This object is useful for navigating along walls and over terrains
Positions, orientations, scalings, and margins may all be changed during the
life time of an object. 


@subsection Who's Afraid of Quaternions?

A quaternion is a four-dimensional vector. The set of quaternions of
length one (points on a four-dimensional sphere) map to the set of
orientations in three-dimensional space. Since in many applications an
orientation defined by either a rotation axis and angle or by a
triple of Euler angles is more convenient, the package includes code for
quaternion operations. The code is found in the mathematics toolkit (MT). 

The quaternion class is located in the file @file{MT_Quaternion.h}. The class
has constructors and methods for setting a quaternion. For example
@example

MT_Quaternion q1(axis, angle);
MT_Quaternion q2(yaw, pitch, roll);

...

q1.setRotation(axis, angle);
q2.setEuler(yaw, pitch, roll);

...

DT_SetOrientation(objectHandle, q1);

@end example
Also included is a static method @code{MT_Quaternion::random()}, which
returns a random orientation.

@subsection Proximity Queries

Objects can also be queried directly using the commands
@example

DT_Scalar DT_GetClosestPair(DT_ObjectHandle object1, DT_ObjectHandle object2,
                            DT_Vector3 point1, DT_Vector3 point2);  

DT_Bool   DT_GetCommonPoint(DT_ObjectHandle object1, DT_ObjectHandle object2,
                            DT_Vector3 point);

DT_Bool   DT_GetPenDepth(DT_ObjectHandle object1, DT_ObjectHandle object2,
                         DT_Vector3 point1, DT_Vector3 point2);  

@end example 
The command @code{DT_GetClosestPair} returns the distance between
@code{object1} and @code{object2}, and a pair of closest points
@code{point1} and @code{point2} given in world coordinates
The command @code{DT_GetCommonPoint} returns a boolean that denotes
whether the objects @code{object1} and @code{object2} intersect, and, in
case of an intersection, returns a common point @code{point} in world
coordinates. 
The command @code{DT_GetPenDepth} also returns a boolean that denotes
whether the objects @code{object1} and @code{object2} intersect, and, in
case of an intersection, returns a pair of witness points of the
penetration depth @code{point1} and @code{point2} in world coordinates.

The maximum relative error in the closest points and penetration depth
computation can be set using
@example

void DT_SetAccuracy(DT_Scalar max_error);

@end example
The default for @code{max_error} is 1.0e-3. Larger errors result
in better performance. Non-positive error tolerances are ignored.

The maximum tolerance on relative errors due to rounding is set using
@example

void DT_SetTolerance(DT_Scalar tol_error);

@end example
This value is the estimated relative rounding error in complex computations
and is used for determining whether a floating-point number should be regarded 
as zero or not. The default value for `tol_error' is the machine epsilon,
which is @code{FLT_EPSILON} when floats are used, and @code{DBL_EPSILON} when
double-precision floating-point numbers are used internally. Very large
tolerances result in false collisions. Setting tol_error too small  
results in missed collisions. Non-positive error tolerances are ignored. 


Furthermore, objects can be queried to return data maintained internally.
The world-axes aligned bounding box of an object is returned using
@example

void DT_GetBBox(DT_ObjectHandle object, DT_Vector3 min, DT_Vector3 max);

@end example
Here, @code{min} and @code{max} are the vertices of the box with
respectively the least and greatest world coordinates.
The local-to-world transformation of an object can be returned using
@example

void DT_GetMatrixf(DT_ObjectHandle object, float *m); 
void DT_GetMatrixd(DT_ObjectHandle object, double *m); 

@end example
The arguments of these commands are again arrays of 16 floating-point numbers 
that represent a 4x4 column-major matrix as discussed above.
 
  
@section Scenes

For scenes with many objects the number of pairwise intersection queries can
become quite large. 
To overcome this bottleneck, objects are maintained in scenes.
The commands for construction and destroying scenes are:
@example

DT_SceneHandle DT_CreateScene(); 
void           DT_DestroyScene(DT_SceneHandle scene);
void           DT_AddObject(DT_SceneHandle scene, 
                            DT_ObjectHandle object);
void           DT_RemoveObject(DT_SceneHandle scene,
                               DT_ObjectHandle object);

@end example
Objects can be shared by multiple scenes. 
Each scene tracks the changes of
placement and deformations of its objects, and updates its cached data
accordingly. In this way, global collision queries using @code{DT_Test} (see
below) can be processed much faster.  



@section Response Handling

Collision response in SOLID is handled by means of callback functions.
The callback functions have the type @code{DT_ResponseCallback} defined by
@example

typedef DT_Bool (*DT_ResponseCallback)(void *client_data, 
                                       void *client_object1, 
                                       void *client_object2,
                                       const DT_CollData *coll_data);

@end example
Here, @code{client_data} is a pointer to an arbitrary structure in the
client application, @code{client_object1} and @code{client_object2} are
the pointers to structures in the client application specified in
@code{DT_CreateObject}, and @code{coll_data} is the response data computed by
SOLID. 
The Boolean value returned by a callback functions indicates whether
further processing of callbacks is needed.
If @code{DT_FALSE} or @code{DT_CONTINUE} is returned, then the remaining
colliding object pairs are processed.
If @code{DT_TRUE} or @code{DT_DONE} is returned, then the call to
@code{DT_Test} is exited without further processing.
We discuss the @code{DT_Test} further on. 
   
Currently, there are three types of response: @dfn{simple},
@dfn{depth} and @dfn{witnessed} response. For simple response the value
of @code{coll_data} is @code{NULL}. 
For depth and witnessed response @code{coll_data} points to the
following structure 
@example


typedef struct DT_CollData @{
    DT_Vector3 point1;
    DT_Vector3 point2;
    DT_Vector3 normal;
@} DT_CollData;

@end example 
An object of this type represents a pair of points of the respective
objects. The points  @code{point1} and @code{point2} are given relative
to the world coordinate system. The @code{normal} field is used for
depth response only. 

For witnessed response, the points represent a witness of the collision.
Both points are contained in the intersection of the colliding objects.
Note that the witness points are not necessarily equal.
For depth response, the @code{normal} represent the penetration depth
vector. 
The penetration depth vector is the shortest vector over which one
object needs to be translated in order to bring the two objects into
touching contact.
The @code{point1} and @code{point2} fields contain the witness points of
the penetration depth, thus @code{normal = point2 - point1}.

Response callbacks are managed in @dfn{response tables}. 
Response tables are defined independent of the scenes in which they are used.
Multiple response tables can be used in one scene, and a response table
can be shared among scenes.
Responses are defined on (pairs of) response classes. Each response table 
maintains its set of response classes.
A response table is created and destroyed using the commands
@example 

DT_RespTableHandle DT_CreateRespTable(); 
void               DT_DestroyRespTable(DT_RespTableHandle respTable); 

@end example
A response class for a response table is generated using
@example 

DT_ResponseClass DT_GenResponseClass(DT_RespTableHandle respTable);
 
@end example
To each object for which a response is defined in the response table a
response class needs to be assigned. This is done using
@example

void DT_SetResponseClass(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                         DT_ObjectHandle object,
                         DT_ResponseClass responseClass);


@end example 
For each pair of objects multiple responses can be defined. A response
is a callback together with its response type and client data.
The @code{DT_ResponseType} is defined by
@example 

typedef enum DT_ResponseType @{ 
    DT_NO_RESPONSE,
    DT_SIMPLE_RESPONSE, 
    DT_WITNESSED_RESPONSE   
    DT_DEPTH_RESPONSE,
@} DT_ResponseType;

@end example
Responses can be defined for all pairs of response classes...
@example

void DT_AddDefaultResponse(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                           DT_ResponseCallback response,
                           DT_ResponseType type,
                           void *client_data);

void DT_RemoveDefaultResponse(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                              DT_ResponseCallback response);

@end example
...per response class...
@example

void DT_AddClassResponse(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                         DT_ResponseClass responseClass,
                         DT_ResponseCallback response,
                         DT_ResponseType type,
                         void *client_data);

void DT_RemoveClassResponse(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                            DT_ResponseClass responseClass,
                            DT_ResponseCallback response);

@end example
... and per pair of response classes...
@example

void DT_AddPairResponse(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                        DT_ResponseClass responseClass1,
                        DT_ResponseClass responseClass2, 
                        DT_ResponseCallback response,
                        DT_ResponseType type, 
                        void *client_data);

void DT_RemovePairResponse(DT_RespTableHandle respTable,
                           DT_ResponseClass responseClass1,
                           DT_ResponseClass responseClass2,
                           DT_ResponseCallback response);

@end example
If for an object pair, one of the objects has a class object response defined,
that needs to be overruled by a pair response, then you should remove
the callback defined in the class response for the pair and add the pair
response, thus
@example

DT_AddClassResponse(respTable, class1, classResponse, 
                    DT_SIMPLE_RESPONSE, client_data);

DT_RemovePairResponse(respTable, class1, class2, classResponse);

DT_AddPairResponse(respTable, class1, class2, pairResponse, 
                   DT_DEPTH_RESPONSE, client_data);

@end example
In the same way, a default response can be overruled by a class or pair
response. 

The response callback functions are executed by calling
@example

DT_Count DT_Test(DT_SceneHandle scene, DT_RespTableHandle respTable);

@end example
This command calls for each colliding pair of objects the corresponding
callback function until all pairs are processed or until a callback function
returns @code{DT_TRUE} or @code{DT_DONE}.   
It returns the number of object pairs for which callback functions have been
executed.

Note: If the response classes of the objects in a callback differ, then
@code{client_object1} has a `lower' response class than
@code{client_object2}. That is, the response class of @code{client_object1} is
generated before the response class of @code{client_object2}. 


@section Deformable Models

SOLID handles deformations of complex shapes.  In this context
deformations are specified by changes of vertex positions. 
Complex shapes that are defined using a vertex array in the client
application may be deformed by changing the array elements, or
specifying a new array. 
SOLID is notified of a change of vertices by the command 
@example

void DT_ChangeVertexBase(DT_VertexBaseHandle vertexBase, 
                         const void *pointer);

@end example 
Note that polytopes constructed from a vertex base using @code{DT_NewPolytope} are not affected
by a change of vertices. 

@section Ray Cast

NOTE: This feature is currently implemented for spheres, boxes, triangles, and
triangle meshes only.
Also, margins are ignored for ray casts.

The commands for performing ray casts are 
@example

void *DT_RayCast(DT_SceneHandle scene, void *ignore_client,
                 const DT_Vector3 source, 
                 const DT_Vector3 target,
                 DT_Scalar max_param, 
                 DT_Scalar *param, DT_Vector3 normal);

DT_Bool DT_ObjectRayCast(DT_ObjectHandle object,
                         const DT_Vector3 source, 
                         const DT_Vector3 target,
                         DT_Scalar max_param, 
                         DT_Scalar *param, DT_Vector3 normal); 

@end example
The ray is given by @code{source}, @code{target}, and @code{max_param}.
It represents the line segment @math{@code{source} + (@code{target} - @code{source}) * t},
where @math{t} is a member of the interval @math{[0, @code{max_param}]}.
So, if @code{max_param} is 1, then the ray is simply the line segment from
@code{source} to @code{target}, whereas if @code{max_param} is equal to
@code{FLT_MAX}, then the ray is `infinite'.     

@code{DT_RayCast} returns a pointer to the client object of an object in
@code{scene} that is hit first by the ray, or @code{NULL} if no object is hit. 
@code{DT_ObjectRayCast} performs a ray cast on a single object and
returns a Boolean indicating a hit. 
In case of a hit, @code{param} points to the @math{t} of the hit spot,
and @code{normal} is a normal to the object's surface in world coordinates.
The normal always points towards the @code{source}.
An object can be made transparent for the ray cast by specifying the
object's client object as @code{ignore_client}.
This is useful if you need to ignore hits of the ray with the source
object of the ray. 
For instance terrain following can be implemented by casting a ray down
and setting the moving object at a distance above the spot.
In this case, you are probably interested in hits with the terrain only,
and do not need reports of hits with the moving object. 

@node Projects, Bugs, Usage, Top
@chapter Projects and other things left to do

@section Coming Attractions

SOLID 4 will have the following added features:
@enumerate

@item Compressed AABB trees for reducing the memory footprint of triangle
meshes to roughly 18 bytes per triangle.  

@item A general ray cast for all shape types. 

@item Shape casting: returning the first collision of a shape that is translated along
a ray. 

@item Scene graphs for managing complex shapes.

@item A binary format for streaming of shapes.

@end enumerate

@node Bugs, , Projects, Top
@chapter Bug Reports

Please send remarks, questions, and bug reports to gino@@dtecta.com.

NOTE: There is no termination after a fixed maximum number of
iterations of GJK in this version of SOLID, since I believe in an
industrial-strength GJK without resorting to tolerance tweaking or forced 
termination after a certain number of iterations. I welcome any reports
of SOLID misbehaving.  


@node GPL, , , License
@include gpl.texi

@node QPL, , , License
@include qpl.texi

@contents
@bye


